Instructions/Labs/lab06-power-bi.md, before:

# LAB 06: Power BI
# Scenario

In this lab, you will build a Power BI dashboard that visualizes data about problems reported by company employees.

# High-level lab steps

We will follow the below steps to design and create the Power BI dashboard:

-   Connect to Common Data Service 
-   Transform the data to include user-friendly descriptions for the related records (lookups)
-    Create and publish a report with various visualizations of the campus visits information
-    User natural language query to build additional visualizations
-    Build mobile view


## Prerequisites

* Must have completed Lab 02 – Data model and model-driven app
* Permissions to install programs on your computer (required for Power BI Desktop installation)

## Things to consider before you begin

-   Who is the target audience of the report?
-   How will the audience consume the report? Typical device? Location?
-   Do you have sufficient data to visualise?
-   What are the possible characteristics you can use to analyse data about the visits?

## Detailed steps

### Exercise 1: Prepare environment & data  

**Objective:** In this exercise, you will install and configure Power BI Desktop and configure a connection to Common Data Service. 

> [!IMPORTANT]
> If you do not have required permissions to install desktop applications or experience difficulties in configuring Power BI Desktop and connecting it to the data, follow **Exercise 4: Import sample data** and then continue on **Exercise 2** but using Power BI service instead of Power BI Desktop.

#### Task 1: Configure Power BI Desktop

1. If you do not have Power BI Desktop installed, open https://aka.ms/pbidesktopstore to download and install Power BI app.
2. Open Power BI Desktop
3. If you were signed in into Power BI Desktop previously, select **File | Sign out** 
4. Sign in if prompted or select **File | Sign in** to sign in.  
5. If you're signing in for the first time you may receive the following prompt

![Prompt to sign up for Power BI account if opened for the first time](06/media/image-6-2.png)

6. Select **Sign up for Power BI** and follow the prompts to complete the sign up 

#### Task 2: Prepare Data

1.  Find out your organization URL

    * Navigate to Power Platform Admin Center at https://aka.ms/ppac.
    * In the left navigation page, select Environments, and then click on the target environment.
    * Right mouse click **Environment URL** on the **Details** panel, then select **Copy link**.

![Copy CDS environment URL](06/media/image-6-1.png)

2. Switch to Power BI desktop

3. Select **Get data | More...**

![Get data command in Power BI Desktop](06/media/image-6-3.png)

4. Select **Power Platform**, then select **Common Data Service**, and press **Connect**.

![Connect to Power Platform > Common Data Service data source](06/media/image-6-4.png)

5. Paste the environment URL you copied earlier, press **OK**.

![Connection details for CDS](06/media/image-6-5.png)

6. The connection details dialog will open up. If you are not signed in, press **Sign in** and follow the prompts to sign in. Press **Connect**. 

![Signing into CDS](06/media/image-6-6.png)

7. Expand **Entities** node, select **lh_Building**, **lh_Department**, **lh_ProblemReport** entities, press **Load**. Wait until the load is complete.

![img](06/media/image-6-7.png)

8. Click **Model** icon on the left vertical toolbar.

![image-20200813002727982](06/media/image-6-8.png)

9. Drag **lh_buildingid** column from **lh_Building** table and drop it to **lh_building** column in **lh_ProblemReport** table. That will create a relationship between two entities that Power BI will be able to use to display related data.

![Connect two related entities](06/media/image-6-9.png)

10. Repeat the previous step to drag **lh_departmentid** column and drop it into **lh_department** column in **lh_ProblemReport**. Your diagram should look like this:

![Final relationships diagram](06/media/image-6-10.png)

11. Select **Report** icon on the left toolbar.

![Report icon on the toolbar](06/media/image-6-11.png)

12. Expand **lh_ProblemReports** node in the **Fields** panel.

13. Click ... and select **New Column**.

![Create new column command](06/media/image-6-12.png)

14. Complete the formula as following

```
Building = RELATED(lh_Building[lh_name])
```

and press ENTER or click checkmark button. That will add a new column with the building name into the problem report data.

![Adding new column using RELATED expression](06/media/image-6-13.png)

15. Repeat two previous steps to add a column **Department** with the following formula 

``` 
Department = RELATED(lh_Department[lh_name])
```

16. Click ... next to the **lh_problemreportid** column and select **Rename**. Enter **Problem Report** as the column name.
17. Click ... next to the **statuscode_display** column and select **Rename**. Enter **Status** as the column name.
18. Save work in progress by pressing **File &#124; Save** and entering a filename of your choice.

### Exercise 2: Create Power BI Report 

**Objective:** In this exercise, you will create a Power BI report based on data from Common Data Service database.

#### Task 1: Create Chart and Time Visualizations

1. Press pie chart icon in the **Visualizations** panel to insert the chart.

![Select pie chart visualization](06/media/image-6-14.png)

2. Drag **Building** field and drop it into **Legend** target box.
3. Drag **Problem Reports** field and drop it into **Values** target box.

![Complete visualization properties by selecting columns as legend and values](06/media/image-6-15.png)

4. Resize the pie chart using corner handles so that all chart components are visible. Your report should now look like this:

![Completed pie chart visualization](06/media/image-6-16.png)

5. Click **New visual** on the Power BI ribbon then select stacked column chart in **Visualizations** pane. 

![Stacked column chart](06/media/image-6-17.png)

6. Drag **Problem Report** field and drop it into **Values** target box.
7. Drag **createdon** field and drop it into **Axis** target box.
8. Click **x** next to **Day** and **Quarter** to leave only **Year** and **Month** totals.

> [!TIP]
> Initial stacked column chart will only display the year level. To access monthly data breakdown you need to expand report into the monthly level. The easiest way to drill down is right-button click on the report and select **Expand next level**.

![image-20200813224441334](06/media/image-6-28.png)

9. Resize the chart as required using the corner handles.
10. Test the report interactivity:

    * Select various building slices on the pie chart and observe changes on the time report.
    * Select various bars on the time column chart and observe changes on the pie report.
    * Drilldown to the month level using icons or **Data/Drill | Expand next level** ribbon command or drilldown toolbar

![Drill down time series stacked column report](06/media/image-6-18.png)

11. Save work in progress by pressing **File | Save**.

#### Challenge

* Replace grouping by building with grouping by **Status** column 

### Exercise 3: Create Power BI Dashboard

#### Task 1: Publish Power BI Report

1. Press **Publish** button on the ribbon.

![Publish command on the ribbon](06/media/image-6-19.png)

2. Select **My workspace** as the destination, then press **Select**.

3. Wait until publishing is complete and click **Open \<name of your report\>.pbix in Power BI**.

![Open published report](06/media/image-6-20.png)

This will open the published report in the browser.

#### Task 2: Create Power BI Dashboard

1. Expand **My workspace**.
2. Select the report under **Reports** heading.

![Select published report](06/media/image-6-21.png)

3. Select **Pin a live page** on the menu. Depending on the layout you may need to press **...** to show additional menu items.

![Pin a live page](06/media/image-6-22.png)

4. Select **New dashboard** on **Pin to dashboard** prompt.
5. Enter **Problem Management** as a **Dashboard name**, press **Pin live**.

![Pin to dashboard](06/media/image-6-23.png)

6. Select **My workspace** node, select **Problem Management** dashboard.
7. Test interactivity of the pie and bar charts displayed.

#### Task 3: Add Visualizations Using Natural Language

1. Select **Ask a question about your data** on top of the dashboard

![Natural language selection](06/media/image-6-24.png)

2. Enter **funnel count of problem reports by status** in Q&A area. The funnel chart will be displayed.
3. Select **Pin visual**.

![Pin visual funnel chart](06/media/image-6-25.png)

4. Select **Existing dashboard**, select **Problem Management** dashboard, press **Pin**.
5. Test the behaviour by clicking on the chart to drilldown to Q&A.

#### Task 4: Build Mobile Phone View

1. Select the **Problem Management** dashboard from **Dashboards** area.
2. Depending on the UI version select either **... &#124; Mobile View** or  **Web View &#124; Phone View**.
3. Rearrange tiles as desired.

![Editing phone view](06/media/image-6-26.png)

4. Select your report under **My Workspace | Reports**
5. Select **... | Generate QR Code**.

![Generating QR code](06/media/image-6-27.png)

6. If you have a mobile device, scan the code using a QR scanner app available on both iOS and Android platforms.

> [!NOTE]
> To access the dashboard and report you will have to sign in on the phone as the same user.

7. Navigate and explore reports and dashboards on a mobile device. 

## Challenges

* Dashboards and reports to include drilldown to individual reports with photos
* Report and analyze problem patterns and trends
* Problem resolution status visualization as a funnel

## Exercise 4: Import sample data

1. Download [problem-reports-data.pbix](06\Resources\problem-reports-data.pbix) and save on your computer
2. Navigate to https://app.powerbi.com/
3. Click **My Workspace**
4. Expand **+New** and select **Upload a file**

![image-20200813231726672](06/media/image-6-29.png)

5. Select **Local File**
6. Locate and select **problem-report-data.pbix** file you've downloaded earlier.
7. Once data load is complete, select **problem-reports-data** report.
8. Click **...** then select **Edit**

![image-20200813232037732](06/media/image-6-30.png)

9. Continue on **Exercise 2**

Commit message:

Added Power BI standalone installer

Instructions/Labs/lab06-power-bi.md, after:

# LAB 06: Power BI
# Scenario

In this lab, you will build a Power BI dashboard that visualizes data about problems reported by company employees.

# High-level lab steps

We will follow the below steps to design and create the Power BI dashboard:

-   Connect to Common Data Service 
-   Transform the data to include user-friendly descriptions for the related records (lookups)
-    Create and publish a report with various visualizations of the campus visits information
-    User natural language query to build additional visualizations
-    Build mobile view


## Prerequisites

* Must have completed Lab 02 – Data model and model-driven app
* Permissions to install programs on your computer (required for Power BI Desktop installation)

## Things to consider before you begin

-   Who is the target audience of the report?
-   How will the audience consume the report? Typical device? Location?
-   Do you have sufficient data to visualise?
-   What are the possible characteristics you can use to analyse data about the visits?

## Detailed steps

### Exercise 1: Prepare environment & data  

**Objective:** In this exercise, you will install and configure Power BI Desktop and configure a connection to Common Data Service. 

> [!IMPORTANT]
> If you do not have required permissions to install desktop applications or experience difficulties in configuring Power BI Desktop and connecting it to the data, follow **Exercise 4: Import sample data** and then continue on **Exercise 2** but using Power BI service instead of Power BI Desktop.

#### Task 1: Configure Power BI Desktop

1. If you do not have Power BI Desktop installed, navigate to [https://aka.ms/pbidesktopstore](https://aka.ms/pbidesktopstore) to download and install Power BI app.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> If you experience issues installing Power BI Desktop using Microsoft Store, try standalone installer that can be downloaded from [https://aka.ms/pbiSingleInstaller](https://aka.ms/pbiSingleInstaller).

2. Open Power BI Desktop
2. If you were signed in into Power BI Desktop previously, select **File | Sign out** 
3. Sign in if prompted or select **File | Sign in** to sign in.  
4. If you're signing in for the first time you may receive the following prompt

![Prompt to sign up for Power BI account if opened for the first time](06/media/image-6-2.png)

6. Select **Sign up for Power BI** and follow the prompts to complete the sign up 

#### Task 2: Prepare Data

1.  Find out your organization URL

    * Navigate to Power Platform Admin Center at https://aka.ms/ppac.
    * In the left navigation page, select Environments, and then click on the target environment.
    * Right mouse click **Environment URL** on the **Details** panel, then select **Copy link**.

![Copy CDS environment URL](06/media/image-6-1.png)

2. Switch to Power BI desktop

3. Select **Get data | More...**

![Get data command in Power BI Desktop](06/media/image-6-3.png)

4. Select **Power Platform**, then select **Common Data Service**, and press **Connect**.

![Connect to Power Platform > Common Data Service data source](06/media/image-6-4.png)

5. Paste the environment URL you copied earlier, press **OK**.

![Connection details for CDS](06/media/image-6-5.png)

6. The connection details dialog will open up. If you are not signed in, press **Sign in** and follow the prompts to sign in. Press **Connect**. 

![Signing into CDS](06/media/image-6-6.png)

7. Expand **Entities** node, select **lh_Building**, **lh_Department**, **lh_ProblemReport** entities, press **Load**. Wait until the load is complete.

![img](06/media/image-6-7.png)

8. Click **Model** icon on the left vertical toolbar.

![image-20200813002727982](06/media/image-6-8.png)

9. Drag **lh_buildingid** column from **lh_Building** table and drop it to **lh_building** column in **lh_ProblemReport** table. That will create a relationship between two entities that Power BI will be able to use to display related data.

![Connect two related entities](06/media/image-6-9.png)

10. Repeat the previous step to drag **lh_departmentid** column and drop it into **lh_department** column in **lh_ProblemReport**. Your diagram should look like this:

![Final relationships diagram](06/media/image-6-10.png)

11. Select **Report** icon on the left toolbar.

![Report icon on the toolbar](06/media/image-6-11.png)

12. Expand **lh_ProblemReports** node in the **Fields** panel.

13. Click ... and select **New Column**.

![Create new column command](06/media/image-6-12.png)

14. Complete the formula as following

```
Building = RELATED(lh_Building[lh_name])
```

and press ENTER or click checkmark button. That will add a new column with the building name into the problem report data.

![Adding new column using RELATED expression](06/media/image-6-13.png)

15. Repeat two previous steps to add a column **Department** with the following formula 

``` 
Department = RELATED(lh_Department[lh_name])
```

16. Click ... next to the **lh_problemreportid** column and select **Rename**. Enter **Problem Report** as the column name.
17. Click ... next to the **statuscode_display** column and select **Rename**. Enter **Status** as the column name.
18. Save work in progress by pressing **File &#124; Save** and entering a filename of your choice.

### Exercise 2: Create Power BI Report 

**Objective:** In this exercise, you will create a Power BI report based on data from Common Data Service database.

#### Task 1: Create Chart and Time Visualizations

1. Press pie chart icon in the **Visualizations** panel to insert the chart.

![Select pie chart visualization](06/media/image-6-14.png)

2. Drag **Building** field and drop it into **Legend** target box.
3. Drag **Problem Reports** field and drop it into **Values** target box.

![Complete visualization properties by selecting columns as legend and values](06/media/image-6-15.png)

4. Resize the pie chart using corner handles so that all chart components are visible. Your report should now look like this:

![Completed pie chart visualization](06/media/image-6-16.png)

5. Click **New visual** on the Power BI ribbon then select stacked column chart in **Visualizations** pane. 

![Stacked column chart](06/media/image-6-17.png)

6. Drag **Problem Report** field and drop it into **Values** target box.
7. Drag **createdon** field and drop it into **Axis** target box.
8. Click **x** next to **Day** and **Quarter** to leave only **Year** and **Month** totals.

> [!TIP]
> Initial stacked column chart will only display the year level. To access monthly data breakdown you need to expand report into the monthly level. The easiest way to drill down is right-button click on the report and select **Expand next level**.

![image-20200813224441334](06/media/image-6-28.png)

9. Resize the chart as required using the corner handles.
10. Test the report interactivity:

    * Select various building slices on the pie chart and observe changes on the time report.
    * Select various bars on the time column chart and observe changes on the pie report.
    * Drilldown to the month level using icons or **Data/Drill | Expand next level** ribbon command or drilldown toolbar

![Drill down time series stacked column report](06/media/image-6-18.png)

11. Save work in progress by pressing **File | Save**.

#### Challenge

* Replace grouping by building with grouping by **Status** column 

### Exercise 3: Create Power BI Dashboard

#### Task 1: Publish Power BI Report

1. Press **Publish** button on the ribbon.

![Publish command on the ribbon](06/media/image-6-19.png)

2. Select **My workspace** as the destination, then press **Select**.

3. Wait until publishing is complete and click **Open \<name of your report\>.pbix in Power BI**.

![Open published report](06/media/image-6-20.png)

This will open the published report in the browser.

#### Task 2: Create Power BI Dashboard

1. Expand **My workspace**.
2. Select the report under **Reports** heading.

![Select published report](06/media/image-6-21.png)

3. Select **Pin a live page** on the menu. Depending on the layout you may need to press **...** to show additional menu items.

![Pin a live page](06/media/image-6-22.png)

4. Select **New dashboard** on **Pin to dashboard** prompt.
5. Enter **Problem Management** as a **Dashboard name**, press **Pin live**.

![Pin to dashboard](06/media/image-6-23.png)

6. Select **My workspace** node, select **Problem Management** dashboard.
7. Test interactivity of the pie and bar charts displayed.

#### Task 3: Add Visualizations Using Natural Language

1. Select **Ask a question about your data** on top of the dashboard

![Natural language selection](06/media/image-6-24.png)

2. Enter **funnel count of problem reports by status** in Q&A area. The funnel chart will be displayed.
3. Select **Pin visual**.

![Pin visual funnel chart](06/media/image-6-25.png)

4. Select **Existing dashboard**, select **Problem Management** dashboard, press **Pin**.
5. Test the behaviour by clicking on the chart to drilldown to Q&A.

#### Task 4: Build Mobile Phone View

1. Select the **Problem Management** dashboard from **Dashboards** area.
2. Depending on the UI version select either **... &#124; Mobile View** or  **Web View &#124; Phone View**.
3. Rearrange tiles as desired.

![Editing phone view](06/media/image-6-26.png)

4. Select your report under **My Workspace | Reports**
5. Select **... | Generate QR Code**.

![Generating QR code](06/media/image-6-27.png)

6. If you have a mobile device, scan the code using a QR scanner app available on both iOS and Android platforms.

> [!NOTE]
> To access the dashboard and report you will have to sign in on the phone as the same user.

7. Navigate and explore reports and dashboards on a mobile device. 

## Challenges

* Dashboards and reports to include drilldown to individual reports with photos
* Report and analyze problem patterns and trends
* Problem resolution status visualization as a funnel

## Exercise 4: Import sample data

In this exercise you will import sample data into Power BI service. That allows you to complete the lab exercises even if do not have required permissions to install desktop applications, or experience difficulties in configuring Power BI Desktop and connecting it to the data. After completion of this exercise you can resume the lab on **Exercise 2** and use Power BI service ([https://app.powerbi.com](https://app.powerbi.com)) instead of Power BI Desktop. 

1. Download [problem-reports-data.pbix](06\Resources\problem-reports-data.pbix) and save on your computer.
2. Navigate to [https://app.powerbi.com/](https://app.powerbi.com/).
3. Click **My Workspace**.
4. Expand **+New** and select **Upload a file**.

![image-20200813231726672](06/media/image-6-29.png)

5. Select **Local File**.
6. Locate and select **problem-report-data.pbix** file you've downloaded earlier.
7. Once data load is complete, select **problem-reports-data** report.
8. Click **...** then select **Edit**.

![image-20200813232037732](06/media/image-6-30.png)

9. Continue on **Exercise 2**.
